---
title: Fed and Fasted Motility
author: James G. Brasseur
Aug 18 2016
---

# What is MMC
The migrating motor complex (MMC) is a motility pattern that is tied to the FASTING state only and there is no MMC in the FED state.

#Fed State Motility

In the fed state the primary aims of the GI tract are associated with digestion of nutrients. This includes the breakdown (or "grinding") of solid material in the stomach, the continuous controlled release of nutrient-rich mean from the stomach across the pylorus and into the duodenum, the controlled transport of chyme along the gut as the chyme mixes with secretions such as bile and pancreatic juices to chemically react with the mechanically broken down food particles and, ultimately, protein, lipid and sugar molecules, the transport of the nutrient molecules to the gut wall by fluid mixing and, for lipids, within micellar particles. and the absorption of carbohydrates, protein, amino-acid, lipid, … molecules across the gut wall (epithelium) into the blood stream. These processes are more-or-less continues in time and are driven by gastric, pyloric and intestinal motility based on the "pacemaker frequency," which is 3 cycles per minute. Thus in the fed state the antrum of the stomach generates peristaltic contractions with a 20 s period and the pylorus opens and closes every 20 s in coordination with pyloric motility. The gut has a variety of contractual patterns that occur continuously, again driven by the pacemaker frequency. The two base contractile patterns  are peristaltic and segmental, peristaltic primarily for transport and segmental primarily for local mixing. however more complex patterns are, mixes of the two patterns, and quiescent periods are common. Also it is know that peristalsis can be antegrade or retrograde although, on average, antegrade is favored since nutrient chyme must be continually driven along the gust form the duodenum, through the jejunum (where most nutrient absorption occurs), through the ilium and into the colon (where most water absorption occurs).  The time for all nutrients to be absorbed and the GI tract to "flip" into the "fasting state" can be 3-6 hrs., typically.
 
# Fasted State Motility

The fasting state is very different since the physiological system is not operating to control nutrient absorption, but rather to control the gut between feeding periods. This is what the migrating motor complex (MMC) is for. Unlike motility in the fed state that has a characteristic time scale of 20s, the characteristic time scale of the MMC complex is 60-90 minutes, typically, but highly variable. The MMC has 3-4 periods of activity, or "phases," depending on how one counts. One tends to focus on phase 3 because that is the phase with the strongest, most measureable and most coherent contractions. In contrast with the fed state where motility is designed for LOCAL absorption and transport, MMC 3 is designed for GLOBAL transport along the gut. These contractions are much stronger (i.e., the GI muscle squeeze much harder) and pass over long sections of the gut, sometimes the entire gut. Sometimes these MMC 3 contractions beginning in the stomach, however often they begin in the intestines. MMC is not associated with the pacemaker frequency. However within the MMC 3 period in any given location of the gut, there also exists motility at much smaller time scale that may be triggered by the pacemaker frequency (I am not sure). The Phase 3 MMC is called the "housekeeper" wave because its primary purpose is to "clean" the gut of accumulated material that can damage the gut over time (this is how that coin that you swallowed as a child got out). The MMC include phase 1 (quiescence) and Phase 2  (lower level mixing motions), however less is known about these periods than phase 3. The reason why there is so much emphasis on phase 3 in the current FDA studies with U Michigan in which I am involved is that these phase 3 contractions clearly will move drug particles and molecules along the gut with strong pressure and shear and, consequently will correlate with absorptions.
 
